# Employment opportunities for CSE students.

Indian universities offer many different academic programs on general area of computer science and its application. Most standardised among these is the B. Tech in Computer Science & Engineering.  MCA (Master in Computer Applications) is also offered by many institutions. MCA syllabus emphasises on teaching programming skills with a fair amount of accounting and a bit of training in business management. Some universities also offer BCA, BSc, and MSc courses in computer science. However, except for IITs, and a few IIITs and CFTIs, most institutions produce non employable graduates.

There are two main reasons for Indian universities producing unemployable CSE graduates:
1. Most institutions admit students with no background for the courses they offer.
2. Most institutions have pretty low quality teaching faculty and resources to offer such courses.
 As a result, the graduating students from most universities do not find any placement offers. Most job seekers have no option but enrol themselves for additional training in so called "finishing schools." Finishing schools are intermediaries who may have ties ups with employers and also run head hunting operations.  

A few other software companies like Infosys TCS, Wipro, HCL, Tech Mahindra have in-house training centers. These companies do not care for what the students have learnt during their graduate studies.  They typically look for the background and general perception on the university's standing. In general, the recruiters look for intrinsic capabilities of a candidate to learn and adapt to a job's challenges.  Infosys in particular runs a very big training center at Mysore which trains 10000 freshers. Most Indian software companies have rigorous training programs like Infosys. If a fresher is unable to complete the training program she is asked to quit.  

Using intermediaries for training, allow the recruiters could avoid many legal problems in avoiding unwanted recruitments and trouble of maintaining in-house training centers.  In summary, Indian universities have survived with producing unemployable graduates in Computer Science because of in-house training of freshers. Universities function as clearing houses for degree certificates. The whole echo system of educating and training students in programming skill is thriving  due to poor university regulatory structure and incompetent teaching faculty of the affiliating university.  

I often found most freshers from state or private universities have never written 100 lines of C code. Sometime back we interviewed a candidate for a teaching post at NIT Durgapur.  We found that the candidate had no clue on basic C programming syntax though he claimed to have written complex C programs for the experiments related to his thesis. Often we hear candidates claim to have enough exposure to programming and data structures. However, they were not proficient enough to answer basic questions of linked lists or binary search trees. 

The skill set requirements for a programmer's job has evolved a lot after 2000. Front end is now web oriented while backend depends on cloud technology and high performance computing. Use of AI and ML have made the backend programming requirement more complicated than ever. Under the changed scenarios a software developer needs to acquire many different programming skills. Teaching such skills through an academic program is not possible unless we update the syllabus. Furthermore, the syllabus update may be possible only to the extent it makes students better prepared to learn required skills faster.  The students can refer to open course wares and other study material available on the Internet can be useful for learning skills for devOPs jobs. 

However, alternate routes for learning skills for job in a software company are expensive. Therefore, upgrading quality of CSE graduates at university levels is extremely important. AICTE, UGC, NAAC, MeitY and other regulatory bodies need to wake up and address the issue of universities producing unemployable engineering graduates. I have discussed more about our [broken education system](./brokenEducation.md) in an earlier post. 

