## Open AI, Social Networking, and Personal Privacy

Machines have already automated millions of routine working-class jobs in manufacturing, ground logistics support, and surface transport. 
Industry 4.0 integrates people with automation, but most heavy-lifting jobs are handled through cobots by advanced production and operation 
techniques with digital technologies. Traditionally labor-intensive jobs are wiped out, leaving most people jobless. To quote Moshe Vardi 
"People are realizing technology destroys and creates jobs even if it's basically true, it's too simplistic." The relationship between technology and 
labor is complex. The questions we should worry about:

- Does technology create as fast as it destroys jobs?  
 - Does technology create the same volume of jobs as it destroys?
 - How quickly can humans adapt or upgrade skills for new jobs?
 - How can we ensure that everybody makes a living?

Vardi worries further that AI may make people unemployed. It will eventually lead to violence in society. 

However, let me restrict here to a new dimension of the impacts of AI is ethics in its applications. Suddenly, computers have started running 
society, and we are poorly equipped to take control. The Vatican has issued "the Rome call  for AI ethics."  Facebook's parent company Meta has 
donated millions to set up an Institute for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence at the Technical University of Munich. AI  underlines "Surveillance 
Capitalism."  In economics, surveillance capitalism refers to making profits out of personal demographics, including age, sex, height, weight, 
hobbies,  health status, contacts, personal preferences, and so on. I consider the use of surveillance capitalism as a euphemism for making profits 
by blackmailing. It is well known that the privacy rules of different countries are different. All social networking platforms like Facebook have 
some privacy agreement with users. However, these rules are location dependent. 

The European Union has stringent General Data Protection Rules (GDPR). Under the GDPR, personal data refers to any information that can identify or 
be traced to a natural person. The natural person is an individual, not a company or a legal entity, otherwise known as a "data subject." For 
example, "personal data" includes a person's name, email address, government-issued identification, other unique identifiers such as an IP address or 
cookie number, and personal characteristics, including photographs.

The GDPR highlights some "special categories" of personal data, which merit higher protection due to their sensitive nature and consequent risk of 
increased privacy harm. It includes information about a data subject's health, genetics, race or ethnic origin, biometrics for identification 
purposes, sex life or sexual orientation, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership. Although criminal 
convictions and records are not considered "special categories" of personal data, this information is subject to amplified protections under the 
GDPR.

Indian DPDP (Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, first proposed in 2018) is still evolving. The latest proposal is available from [Meity's web 
portal](https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/The%20Digital%20Personal%20Data%20Potection%20Bill%2C%202022_0.pdf). It contains all the 
suggested amendments and addresses several provisions that were not added earlier. It has yet to be approved. Usually, the legislation aspect of the 
law is fine in India. It is the enforcement of the law that is a big problem. The system of dispensation of justice is a big problem in India. An 
aggrieved person may have to wait over a decade for substantial relief. I believe ten years in a person's life is very long, especially if personal 
privacy is breached in the case of a teen or a child, as it happens in most nations under dictatorship. The surveillance laws in such countries allow 
the authorities to access personal data, and people are vulnerable to state-sponsored personal abuses. In India, both state and central govt harassed 
many political opponents [invoking  66A of the IT Act until the supreme court struck it down](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/no-
citizens-to-be-prosecuted-under-section-66a-it-act-sc/articleshow/94816298.cms).

I don't know if GoI is aware of AI-based data mining and its impacts in harvesting Survelliance Capital by E-com and social networking platforms. A 
robust data security Act is required with provisions for quick redressal against any breach by individuals, companies, govt, and other entities, 
including communion and groups of individuals.


[Back to Index](../index.md)
