# Importance of Coding

[Blog Index](../index.md)

Programming and data structure are two important elements in building a career as a software techie. India boasts of a number of software companies like TCS, 
Infosys, HCL Technologies, Mindtree, Tech Mahinda, L&T infotech, ITC infotech, First source, etc. I understand all of these companies have in-house training 
units. They induct graduate trainees and put them through rigorous coding training before induction. Many of the trainees are unable to cope-up the rigor and 
leave in the middle.

The problem lies in background and preparation. There is a gap in demand and supply as far as the availability of the coders is concerned. Most placements happen 
based on the intrinsic capabilities of the students rather than their abilities to code. The companies would like to recruit only graduates from known 
institutions rather than graduates with coding capabilities. The idea is that if the students have a good attitude, they can learn quickly and become productive 
quite soon. Yet, the companies would still prefer the graduates who can be productive from day 1. In-job training is only possible for short durations like a 
week or two or at most three weeks. With this in mind, most companies will prefer undergraduates who have good aptitude and have received enough training in 
programming and data structures. So, in this blog, I address the issue of training in programming and data structures. Let me address these issues one at a time. 
The first is the choice of programming language. 


I remember that a few of our colleagues in the department were excited about Java and ignored the saner voices to introduce Java for teaching programming to the 
first-year students. They argued that Java can enable students to learn network programming. The students may use embedded graphics and multimedia stuff in 
programs and create useful utilities that excite them. 


Unfortunately, it turned out to be a disastrous experiment, as three of the other faculty members, including me, predicted. The student counsellor told us that 
some students could not comprehend the lectures in the class, which focused mainly on teaching objects, inheritance, polymorphism, and object manipulation stuff 
to the students who never had any previous coding experience. None of the topics like network programming or embedding graphics, audio or video can be covered a 
one-semester course. It was wishful thinking on the colleagues who insisted on the experiment of introducing Java as first programming language course. I still 
remember that our opinions were treated in a patronizing manner "oh, you don't know" or "I can't believe you don't understand." The result was that many students 
sought help from city coaching centers to complete programming assignments. Since the first programming course is compulsory for all engineering students across 
disciplines, professors from other departments were very upset with the dept of CSE for carrying out such a disastrous experiment on the students. Finally, after 
six semesters, we reverted to C. C with all its peculiarities still the most preferred language for teaching programming if we carefully avoid the tricks.


Of late, some university depts have started using Python. Python is catching up quickly as the preferred choice for teaching programming courses. However, if my 
memory serves me correctly, perhaps PASCAL was taught until 2000 to the students in IIT Kanpur. It is pedagogically the best programming language, as it is the 
closest implementation of algorithms into code.  

 

As far as Python is concerned, the three major advantages are:

 

   - Creating Python programs take significantly less time than programming either in Java or in C++ or C. 
   - Python programs are shorter than the equivalent programs in Java or C++ because of dynamic typing and built-in types.
   - A large set of highly useful libraries are available that support easy to use in Python programs. 

 

Most leading universities in the US, including MIT, CMU, Berkeley, UIUC teach Python as the first programming language course ( Esther Shein , Python for 
Beginners, CACM, vol 58, no. 3). 


IIT Bhilai is carrying out an exciting experiment. It has started to teach web programming using Python and Flask at an introductory level. I am not sure about 
the students' reactions. But the idea is entirely novel. It is expected to achieve two things. First, the students will be excited to see their programs can be 
both useful and available. After all, one learns program to create some software that others will use, and most users will use it over the internet through a 
public server. So, I believe the approach is likely to have greater acceptance among the students. Pedagogically, it will not be a major shift from teaching 
Python. But has an added advantage of student learning HTML, CSS, Flask along with Python. Teaching Python through web programming approach came from Rajat 
Moona, the incumbent director of IIT Bhilai. Since the faculty at IIT Bhilai is young, they enthusiastically supported it.  

[Back to Index](../index.md)
