## Distruptive Technologies

Disruptive communication technology is one that significantly alters the way of communication. In recent years we witnessed two disruptive communication systems (i) social networking systems and (ii) Instant messaging systems. We are familiar with a few social networking system are Facebook, LinkedIn, Youtube, and WeChat. Telegram, WhatsApp, Instagram are examples of Instant messing systems. Both communication technologies are excellent innovations to bring the world closer. However, the flip side of such disruptive communication has overburdened the already stressed lives of ordinary people while app creators have a roaring business along with network service providers. Meta, Google, and Microsoft have already started controlling the govt policies worldwide. Ukraine seems to be winning over Russia in the ongoing conflict in the communication space. Meta has changed its message posting policies to allow for Russian political dispensation abuse. However, this post is not about Ukraine and Russia conflict. The purpose of the post is to evolve a discussion on the etiquettes of using disruptive communication.
I remember when the disruptive intervention of Arnab Goswami transformed the Times Now TV news. His only motivation was to change TV transmission of news from a passive electronic medium like the Radio or Akashvani. Mr. Goswami became instant bete noire for all news anchors and the people holding leftist views, but TRP of Times Now increased tremendously. Mr. Goswami was eventually kicked out of Times Now, and Republic TV came into existence. The disruptive news transmission is another example of disruptive communication. I intend not to go into disruptive interventions in the TV news anchoring. I want to make the point that the disruptive interventions created a chasm among people on both sides of the center. The free use of profanities jolted people. But eventually, all seasoned political commentators, the political parties, and groups either developed strong likes or strong dislikes. However, they could not ignore Mr. Goswami while he merrily created his TRP and established Republic TV.
Having pointed out the importance of disruptive communication, let us focus on Whatsapp or other instant messaging apps. World over have been dragged into disruptive communication systems due to the end device called cell phones and numerous Instant messaging apps. There are two sides to any tale. The brighter side is that communication has become easy for the self-employed workforce such as a carpenter, plumbers, electricians, and small artisans. Business communication has turned instant for the aggregators' firms. Consumers find it easy to communicate with service providers. However, large business establishments soon learned to use instant messaging to create disruptive interventions in personal privacies. I keep getting robot calls during important meetings. It had forced me to leave the phone switched off. People have to learn to live incommunicado mode to escape the nuisance of disruptive intervention in personal privacy. Blocking numbers does more harm than solving privacy problems. The blocker apps create a database of cell numbers and market them with impunity to advertising firms. The nexus is frightening.
However, the most irritations come in trolls and unsolicited knowledge dissemination through Instant messaging systems. I keep getting rehashed and recirculated WhatsApp media files every alternate day. I don't know if WhatsApp has a spam filter or turn it on. It is high time that instant messaging app developers should provide easy ways to kill spam. Trolls are a big nuisance. A troll can make an average person break within a couple of minutes. Usually, the unconnected trollers find it tempting to gang together without any reason. It confirms the herd mentality of Animal Firm. Sometimes, people who don't have anything to do with the issue start commenting.
I have to subscribe to a large WhatsApp group where people seem to have a view on every damn thing from toothbrush to broom, Kashmir to Gujrat, from Buddha to Confucius, from Chanakya to Machiavelli. I fondly call them Professors of IWU (International WhatsApp University). But honestly, the quality of posts does not show that the academic excellence of the nation has increased one bit. Rather the profanity in public discourse has deteriorated. You may get 1000 messages if you ever say anything like Why sky looks blue today? or "Why PM did ot did is silent say something on Ukraine Russia conflict?"
I don't understand if an average person has anything to do with Ukraine war except being harassed due to price inflation. The rampant use of greetings like good morning, good evening, or even "international day of morons" makes me wonder if God has suddenly decided to make everyone happy, and the world has become flat. Yet hatred, spewing venom on tweeter becomes essential. Some "influencers" get paid by the groups seeking to create troubles. The business of dirt and gossip is just mind bugling. Only one thing that comes to my mind is that "digital flith sells." Unmindful personal privacy, people ogle at the digital filth and actively participate in making the flith stink more. In they expose themselves to privacy invasion. Profiling becomes simple due to digital footprints. AI, ML, and Data Science gain importance over foundational technologies.
